#summary A list of topic ideas for story-based documentation, tutorials and other articles.

These are in no particular order...  Feel free to add to this list.

 * Configuring Visual Studio for Source Server support to look inside Gallio and MbUnit while debugging.

 * Overview of the Pattern Test Framework.

 * Writing a new decorator.

 * Writing a new data binder.

 * Writing a new data attribute and data set.

 * All about data binding with generic type parameters, constructor parameters, fields, properties, generic method parameters and method parameters.

 * How to create a Gallio plugin.  The L0LTest framework.

 * Using the MSBuild and NAnt tasks.

 * Using the PowerShell cmdlets.

 * Gallio and the R# test runner.

 * The Gallio reflection API.

 * Common Gallio extension points in the IoC container.

 * The Gallio test model, an overview.

 * Test steps.  What are they good for?

 * Static vs. dynamic test instances.

 * Configuring CCNet for Gallio, step by step.

 * The Gallio constraint library.

 * How to write a Gallio adapter for a new test framework.

 * Fun things to do with execution log attachments.

 * The filter expression language.

 * Using Echo.

 * Using Icarus.

 * Test runner factories: LocalAppDomain, IsolatedAppDomain, IsolatedProcess, NCover, TypeMock.

 * Using Gallio with NCover and NCoverExplorer.

 * Getting started with the Gallio source tree and build system.

 * Using Gallio with both NCover and TypeMock at the same time.

 * MbUnit assertion rundown.

 * Interpreting Gallio reports.

 * Why you might want to use the Gallio test runner with NUnit, xUnit.Net, MbUnit v2, CSUnit, CppUnit, MSTest and other supported frameworks instead of the native ones.

 * Test profiles for configuring tests by environment.

 * Test assembly .config files.

 * Gallio architecture 101.

 * Gallio converter service.  How to write a new conversion rule.

 * Why choose a framework built on Gallio.

 * Migrating MbUnit v2 tests to MbUnit v3.